z
O
This document contains
playtest materials.
These are mostly untested
and might be poorly balanced.
y
y
Fabula Ultima is being published by Need Games.
Find more at:
www.fabulaultima.com
www.patreon.com/roosterema
https://discord.com/invite/G9qGbn2CHANGELOG
Below you can find the latest updates to the contents of this file.
Previously Updated: January 23rd, 2025
w Heroic Style Skills: Agile Defender Style has received a few further tweaks, with the hope of giving
it a more unique identity. Prophetic Defender Style now grants three uses of Divination during
conflicts. Fuma Shuriken Style now requires a ranged weapon and is not interrupted by using Crossfire.
Gunbreaker Style no longer enables Breach on ranged weapons.
w Core Book Variants (version 1.11): Spellblade no longer grants extra damage with Dexterity, instead
granting a bonus to the Check (which is no longer automatic for all weapons, since non-DEX based
weapons are assumed to be MIG + MIG, INS + INS, or WLP + WLP, all of which don't need further help or
are already in line with a spellcaster's normal need, and said caster won't take Spellblade).
Last Updated: December 5th, 2024
w Heroic Style Skills: Agile Defender Style has been made a bit less excessive. Iaido Style now features
more precise limitations. Palm and Step Style is also unavailable on characters with Triple Slash (due to
Blade Adept allowing for quadruple hits). Punishing Style has been rewritten more clearly. Clarified that
Piercing Sorcery Style only applies if the target is hit. Skyspear Style was modified to remove abuse
from the Teamwork action and the possibility of "softlocking" yourself in the air.
w Core Book Variants (version 1.10): Stolen Time had the HP loss slightly buffed. Encourage is not
restricted to conflicts. Magitech Override now also affects elementals. Swapped the position of the
Defense benefit and elemental benefit of Magitech Armament (the ability to create armaments of
different elements encourages a more interactive gameplay compared to the Defense bonus, so it
made sense for it to appear earlier); the armament now also states it always occupies both hand slots.
Removed firearms from Monkey Grip.
The rules for Pressure and Stagger now only apply to elites and champions (they proved way too fiddly
on soldiers).
Added an optional rule for Category-based Affinities.Previously Updated: November 7th, 2024
w Heroic Style Skills: Gunbreaker Style is a little more restrictive in terms of applications. Palm and Step
Style, which was extremely poorly received, has been completely remade. Duelist Style reduces MP costs
by 5 instead of ignoring them, adding some nuance and preventing playtest Breach spam.
w Core Book Variants (version 1.9): Condemn and Encourage have been rebuilt to put them a bit closer to
their original function and mechanics, in the hopes of better qualifying for errata application outside of
this playtest. The Magitech Armament branch has received some tweaks (+1 Accuracy, +2 damage, and a
variable bonus to Defenses that scales with Gadgets). Stolen Time similarly has been tweaked to make
it less attack-reliant and closer to the original version, but still improved in usefulness.
Added a variant rule for the tonic.
Modified the rules for battle stances.
Previously Updated: September 9th, 2024
Starting with this update, Arcanist Rework and Core Book Reworks will be renamed Variants, so
as to avoid giving the impression that they are Errata. My fault for a poor naming choice and
communication on these.
w Heroic Style Skills: Collector Style is now more precise in its restrictions. Added Gunbreaker Style (once
again, it's Tails' fault). Added Palm and Step Style. Skyspear Style deals 5 more extra damage. Punishing
Style cannot be used twice in a row, but allows you to cover and can extend your counter to ranged
attacks and offensive spells.
w Core Book Variants (version 1.8): Fixed a typo on magitech armament (the first Accuracy choice is
Dexterity and Insight, not Dexterity and Might). Reduced the extra damage from Condemn. Removed
the reduced Accuracy/Magic Check scaling for NPCs, as I've mathed it out and if Players engage with
the game as expected for those levels, they will absolutely be able to avoid 30-40% of the hits through
status effects, equipment, and abilities. Breach had its support option slightly weakened, and lets
physical damage have its time under the spotlight with Vulnerabilities. The Cheap Shot variant has
also been removed, since I believe single-attack users don't need it (there are other benefits to it that
compensate).
Clarified that staggered flying enemies are forced to land.
Previously Updated: August 11th, 2024
w Heroic Style Skills: Seven Weapon Style became Collector Style. Added Dark Blessing Style.
w Arcanist Rework: Arcane Regeneration is now a "may" Skill, no longer mandatory.
w Core Book Reworks (version 1.7): Added numerous options for Tinkerer; you can now choose whether
to try a mildly reworked version of the Magitech branch, or fully separate magicannon and magispheres
into two different branches, each with its own 3 steps: Magitech Armament and Magispheres. Tempest
Strike has been modified. Retaliation is back to "caring about" the Guard action and covering allies, but
in a different way that hopefully encourages alternating between different strategies. Introduced the
Battle Stances system (see end of the document).4
W
HEROIC STYLE SKILLS
W
The following Heroic Skills provide additional support to builds and playstyles that
have been widely requested, underrepresented, or could use a bit more nuance.
w None of these Heroic Skills require mastery of a specific Class; thus, you can acquire
them whenever you master any Class, provided you fulfill all the listed requirements.
w A Player Character can only have up to one Heroic Style Skill, and no two characters
in the same group can share the same Heroic Style Skill.
w As an optional rule, you might let each Player Character gain their Style Skill at
character creation. If you do, characters who have no interest in a Style Skill can
instead pick a Heroic Skill tied to one of their starting Classes. Obviously, this option
makes the party a bit stronger than normal – one way to address this is to have each
Player Character skip the first Heroic Skill they would normally gain.
LIST OF HEROIC STYLE SKILLS
Heroic Skill Requirements Effect summary
Dodge 2+ and Become a defensive character
Agile Defender Style
Dexterity d10+ based on Dodge.
Elementally imbue enemies
Blast Gladiator Style Bone Crusher
with Bone Crusher.
Dexterity and/or Negate and deflect ranged
Bullet Deflection Style
Insight d10+ attacks with swords.
Boost the first brawling attack
Charged Punch Style Withstand
after Withstand.
Able to equip one type Gain benefits from always using
Collector Style
of martial weapon different weapons.
Dark Blessing Style Shadow Strike Heal allies with Shadow Strike.
Detonation Style Basic Alchemy Improve damage potions.
Able to equip martial Fight better with a single one-
Duelist Style
melee weapons handed melee weapon.
Send your two-handed thrown
Fūma Shuriken Style Barrage
weapons spinning.If these Heroic Skills prove solid during playtest, it is possible they will be
released in the future; for now, please enjoy them and provide feedback!
LIST OF HEROIC STYLE SKILLS
Heroic Skill Requirements Effect summary
Use melee Skills when using a
Sharpshooter and
Gunbreaker Style ranged transforming weapon
Weaponmaster
form and vice versa.
Ranged Weapon Unleash three attacks from a
Gunslinger Style
Mastery 2+ one-handed firearm.
Heightened 2+ spells that Change the damage type of
Element Style deal damage spells and improve them.
Seize the opportunity when an
Hidden Weapon Style Cheap Shot
enemy's Vulnerability is hit.
Improves staves, improvised,
Humble Style Willpower d8+
and non-martial weapons.
Melee Weapon Sheathe your sword, then strike
Iaidō Style
Mastery 2+ with unique effects.
Investigator Style Flash of Insight Use your deductions in battle.
Dodge and/or Improves unarmed strikes and
Palm and Step Style
Indomitable Spirit grants additional attacks.
Concentrate Cataclysm upon a
Piercing Sorcery Style Cataclysm
single target.
Prophetic Defender Become a defensive character
Divination
Style based on Insight.
Punishing Style Counterattack Improves Counterattacks.
Strengthen bows and trigger
Ranger Style Resourceful
traps when a conflict begins.
High Speed and/or Attack or cast a spell after you
Reaper Style
Stolen Time defeat an enemy.
Improves the reach and
Scorpion Tail Style Dexterity d10+
flexibility of flails.
W
56
W
W
LIST OF HEROIC STYLE SKILLS
Heroic Skill Requirements Effect summary
Jump high into the air before
Skyspear Style Soaring Strike
Soaring Strike with spears.
Treat brawling weapons
Healing Power and
Thaumaturge Style as arcane and cast Heal or
Cleanse and/or Heal
Cleanse after attacks.
Dexterity and/or Strike twice with heavy and
Vortex Warrior Style
Might d10+ sword weapons.
AGILE DEFENDER STYLE
Requirements: you must have Skill Level 2 or higher in Dodge (see Rogue), and must
have a Dexterity base die size of d10 or higher.
As long as you have no shields and no martial armor equipped, you gain the following
benefits:
w You may use the Protect Skill (see Guardian) even if you have not acquired it.
w You treat your Skill Level in Dodge as being increased by 2 (to a maximum of 5).
w When you use the Protect Skill during another creature's turn, damage you suffer
is reduced by an amount equal to【 your current Dexterity die size】 until the end
of that turn (before applying Affinities).BLAST GLADIATOR STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Bone Crusher Skill (see Weaponmaster).
Choose one damage type among air, bolt, dark, earth, fire, ice, light, physical, and
poison.
When you use the Bone Crusher Skill on one or more creatures, you may have each of
those creatures become imbued until the end of the scene.
After one or more imbued creatures lose Hit Points, each of those creatures stops
being imbued and you deal an amount of damage of the chosen type equal to【 2 +
(twice your Skill Level in Bone Crusher)】 to them. The type of this damage cannot be
changed; this effect deals 5 extra damage if you are level 20 or higher, or 10 extra
damage if you are level 40 or higher; it also deals an additional 5 extra damage if you
have a brawling or firearm weapon equipped, or if you have a weapon module (see
Pilot) equipped.
BULLET DEFLECTION STYLE (inspired by Tails on Discord!)
Requirements: you must have a Dexterity base die size of d10 or higher and/or an
Insight base die size of d10 or higher.
After a creature you can see performs a ranged attack, you may spend an amount of
Mind Points equal to【 5 + the Result of their Accuracy Check】 in order to have the
attack fail automatically against all targets. If you do and the Result of that Accuracy
Check is an even number, you may have one enemy you can see lose an amount of Hit
Points equal to that Check's High Roll.
You can only use this Skill if you have a weapon of the sword Category equipped, and
it has no effect if the Accuracy Check was a critical success.
CHARGED PUNCH STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Withstand Skill (see Fury).
When you perform the Guard action and activate the Withstand Skill, you may choose
one brawling weapon you have equipped. If you do, choose one option: double the
High Roll when determining damage of the next attack you perform with the chosen
weapon before the end of your next turn; or if the next attack you perform with the
chosen weapon before the end of your next turn would have its High Roll treated as
being equal to 0 when determining damage, instead you may use its normal value.
W
78
W
W
COLLECTOR STYLE
Requirements: you must be able to equip martial melee weapons, and/or be able to
equip martial ranged weapons.
Your backpack can contain any number of weapons.
At the end of your turn during a conflict scene, you may perform the Equipment action
for free.
When you attack with a weapon during a conflict, if this is the first time you attack with
that weapon during this conflict, you gain a +5 bonus to your Accuracy Check and the
attack deals 5 extra damage (the two forms of a transforming custom weapon are still
considered "the same weapon" for the sake of this effect). This benefit does not apply
to unarmed strikes, magicannon (see Tinkerer) and twin shields (see Guardian), but it
does apply as usual to weapon modules (see Pilot).
DARK BLESSING STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Shadow Strike Skill (see Darkblade).
When you lose Hit Points due to your Shadow Strike Skill, if doing so does not reduce
you to 0 Hit Points, every ally present on the scene recovers an equal amount of Hit
Points. This amount increases by 5 Hit Points if you are level 20 or higher, or by 10 Hit
Points if you are level 40 or higher.
DETONATION STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the basic Alchemy benefit from the Gadget
Skill (see Tinkerer).
When you use your Alchemy to create a potion, you can always select effects 3 to 8
(you can treat those effects as if they had "Any" in the "Die" column of the table). If the
potion is advanced or superior, its damage ignores Resistances.
When you succeed on a Check to advance or turn back a Clock, if your approach relied
on explosives, gunpowder or pyrotechnics, you may fill or erase 1 additional section
of that Clock.DUELIST STYLE
Requirements: you must be able to equip martial melee weapons.
As long as you have a one-handed melee weapon equipped in your main hand slot, if
that weapon is not an unarmed strike and you have an unarmed strike equipped in
your off-hand slot, you gain the following benefits:
w When you deal damage with a weapon that is not an unarmed strike, you may
double your Accuracy Check's High Roll when determining the attack's damage.
If you do, you cannot use this option again until the beginning of your next turn.
w During conflicts, you reduce the MP cost of the following Skills by 5: Bladestorm,
Breach, Condemn, Encourage, and Provoke (see Fury, Orator, and Weaponmaster).
These benefits do not apply to weapon modules (see Pilot).
FŪMA SHURIKEN STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Barrage Skill (see Sharpshooter).
During a conflict, you may use an action to perform a free attack with a two-handed
ranged thrown custom weapon you have equipped. If you do, that attack gains the
multi (2) property (which can still be enhanced to 3 via the Barrage Skill); if the attack
hits one or more creatures, you may send your equipped weapon spinning.
At the start of your turn, if your equipped weapon is still spinning, it stops spinning and
you choose up to two options: every enemy present on the scene loses 5 Hit Points; or
every enemy present on the scene loses 5 Mind Points; or every enemy present on the
scene suffers slow; or fill or erase 1 section of a Clock. The amount of Hit Points and/
or Mind Points lost increases to 10 if you are level 30 or higher.
Your weapon stops spinning immediately if you no longer have it equipped, if you
perform another attack with it, or if the scene ends.
W
910
W
W
GUNBREAKER STYLE (it's Tails' fault once again!)
Requirements: you must have acquired both the Sharpshooter and Weaponmaster Classes.
As long as you have a transforming custom weapon equipped, if one of its forms is
melee and the other is ranged, you may use the Bone Crusher and Counterattack Skills
(see Weaponmaster) with its ranged form, and may use the Crossfire and Warning
Shot Skills (see Sharpshooter) with its melee form; however, you cannot use Bone
Crusher and Warning Shot with the same attack. Additionally, both forms are treated
as being firearms for the sake of allowing the second option of the Hawkeye Skill.
When you perform the Bone Crusher Skill with a ranged weapon, or when you perform
the Warning Shot Skill with a melee weapon, your Skill Level in them is treated as
being increased by 2 (to a maximum of SL 6).
GUNSLINGER STYLE
Requirements: you must have Skill Level 2 or higher in Ranged Weapon Mastery (see
Sharpshooter).
You may use an action to perform up to three consecutive free attacks with a one-
handed firearm weapon equipped in your main hand slot (against the same target
or different targets). If you do, all attacks performed this way follow the rules for
two-weapon fighting: they lose the multi property and cannot gain it, and you treat
the High Roll of each Accuracy Check as being equal to 0 when determining damage.
Additionally, if any attack made this way misses, you lose your rhythm and cannot
perform the remaining attacks.
You may use this Skill only if you have a one-handed firearm weapon equipped in your
main hand slot, if that weapon is not a weapon module (see Pilot) whose text says "A
personal vehicle with this module enabled cannot have any other weapon modules
enabled", and if your off-hand slot is empty or contains an unarmed strike.
HEIGHTENED ELEMENT STYLE
Requirements: you must have learned two or more spells that deal damage.
Choose a damage type among air, bolt, dark, earth, fire, ice, light, physical, and poison.
When you deal damage with a spell, you may change that damage's type to the one
you have chosen; and as long as a spell you cast deals damage of the chosen type, that
spell deals 5 extra damage and all its damage ignores Resistances.HIDDEN WEAPON STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Cheap Shot Skill (see Rogue).
Choose a status effect among dazed, shaken, slow, and weak.
After one or more enemies you can see lose Hit Points due to damage dealt by one of
your allies, if at least one of them is Vulnerable to the type of damage dealt by your
ally, you may choose one of those enemies. If you do, that enemy loses an amount of
Hit Points equal to【 half your level + (twice your Skill Level in Cheap Shot)】 and also
suffer the chosen status effect.
Once you use this Skill during a conflict, you may not use it again until the beginning
of your next turn.
HUMBLE STYLE
Requirements: you must have a Willpower base die size of d8 or higher.
When you acquire this Heroic Skill, choose two different Attributes among Dexterity,
Insight, Might, and Willpower: when you perform an Accuracy Check with a non-
martial weapon, you may replace the required Attributes with those you have chosen.
As long as you have two or fewer weapons equipped, your attacks with non-martial
weapons deal 5 extra damage and you may also treat those weapons as belonging
to the spear and sword Categories for the sake of Skills that require it; this benefit
does not apply to unarmed strikes, weapon modules (see Pilot), twin shields (see
Guardian), and magicannon (see Tinkerer).
As long as the only weapon you have equipped is a staff (see Core Rulebook, page
130), you apply all of the above benefits but may also treat that staff as belonging
to the brawling and heavy Categories for the sake of Skills that require it, and your
attacks with it deal an additional 5 extra damage.
Additionally, when you perform an attack using an improvised weapon, you deal 5
extra damage and may have that weapon not be destroyed after the attack.
W
1112
W
W
IAIDŌ STYLE
Requirements: you must have Skill Level 2 or higher in Melee Weapon Mastery (see
Weaponmaster).
When you join a conflict and/or when you enter Crisis for the first time during a conflict,
if you have exactly one weapon equipped and that weapon is a two-handed sword, or
if you have exactly one weapon module equipped and that weapon module belongs
to the sword Category (see Pilot), you may enter a iaidō stance.
When an enemy you can see begins their turn, if you are in your iaidō stance, you may
exit it. If you do, you perform a free attack with a weapon belonging to the sword
Category you have equipped; this attack must include that enemy among its targets.
When you perform an attack with a weapon belonging to the sword Category, if you
are in your iaidō stance, you may exit it. If you do, the attack deals extra damage equal
to【 your Skill Level in Melee Weapon Mastery, multiplied by 5】 and you choose up
to one option: fill or erase 1 section of a Clock if the attack hits all its targets; or the
attack can target creatures that cannot be targeted by melee attacks; or each creature
hit by the attack cannot perform free attacks until the end of the current turn.
You automatically exit iaidō stance as soon as you no longer have the same sword
weapon equipped or have more than one weapon or weapon module equipped.
INVESTIGATOR STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Flash of Insight Skill (see Loremaster).
When you perform a Check to examine a creature, item or location during a conflict
scene, you may memorize the High Roll of that Check.
When a source deals damage to one or more creatures you can see, you may forget
one of your memorized High Rolls to choose one option: that source deals extra
damage to each creature equal to the forgotten High Roll; or reduce damage dealt
by that source to each creature by an amount equal to the forgotten High Roll (before
applying Affinities).
You automatically forget all memorized High Rolls at the end of each scene.PALM AND STEP STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Dodge Skill (see Rogue) and/or the
Indomitable Spirit Skill (see Fury), and must not have acquired the Empty Hands or
The Beast Who Spoke Quirks, nor the Akromorphosis Skill (see Mutant) or the Triple
Slash Heroic Skill (see High Fantasy Atlas).
Your unarmed strikes deal extra damage equal to【 twice your Skill Level in
Indomitable Spirit】, and your Accuracy Checks with them receive a bonus equal to
【your Skill Level in Dodge】.
At the end of your turn during a conflict, if you hit two or more times with attacks
using brawling weapons during that turn, or if you hit two or more creatures with an
attack using a brawling weapon during that turn, you may perform a free attack with
a brawling weapon you have equipped. This attack must target a single creature, and
you treat its High Roll as being equal to 0 when determining damage.
As long as you have this Heroic Skill, you cannot acquire the Empty Hands or The Beast
Who Spoke Quirks, and you cannot acquire the Akromorphosis Skill (see Mutant) or
the Triple Slash Heroic Skill (see High Fantasy Atlas).
PIERCING SORCERY STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Cataclysm Skill (see Elementalist).
Once per turn, when you use the Cataclysm Skill to increase the total MP cost of an
offensive spell (r) with a target of "Up to three creatures" by 10 or more, if that spell
targets only one creature, you may double the extra damage granted by Cataclysm. If
you do and the spell hits its target, you may choose up to two options: damage dealt
by the spell ignores Resistances; or if the target of the spell is flying, you force them
to land immediately; or the target of the spell suffers dazed; or the target of the spell
cannot perform the Guard action during their next turn.
W
1314
W
W
PROPHETIC DEFENDER STYLE
Requirements: you must have learned the Divination spell (see Entropist).
When you cast the Divination spell during a conflict scene, it will end after forcing
three rerolls (instead of two).
When a source causes one or more allies present on the scene to lose Hit Points, if
you are currently affected by your Divination spell, you may expend one of the forced
rerolls granted by the spell. If you do, you suffer all those Hit Point losses in place of
those allies, as separate instances (you cannot choose to suffer only some of them);
additionally, each of these Hit Point losses is reduced by 5 (example: if a source causes
you and two of your allies to lose 20 Hit Points each, using this Skill would have
you lose 15 Hit Points, then 15 Hit Points, and finally another 15 Hit Points). If your
Divination spell has no forced rerolls remaining after you use this Skill, it ends.
Additionally, your maximum Hit Points and Crisis score are now calculated based on
your base Insight die size, instead of your base Might die size.
PUNISHING STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Counterattack Skill (see Weaponmaster).
When you perform the Guard action, if you did not perform the Guard action on your
previous turn during this scene, choose one among ranged attacks and offensive spells
(r). You gain the following benefits until the start of your next turn:
w Your Counterattack Skill triggers against all melee attacks that hit or miss you,
even if the Result of the Accuracy Check is not an even number.
w If you chose ranged attacks, your Counterattack Skill also triggers against ranged
attacks that hit or miss you, regardless of the Accuracy Check's Result.
w If you chose offensive spells (r), your Counterattack Skill also triggers against
offensive spells (r) that hit or miss you, regardless of the Magic Check's Result.
w When you perform a free attack with your Counterattack Skill, if the triggering
attack or spell hit you, you deal 5 extra damage.RANGER STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Resourceful Skill (see Wayfarer).
At the start of a conflict scene, you may spend 20 Mind Points to reveal you set traps
in the surrounding area and choose a status effect among dazed, shaken, slow, and
weak: if you do, every enemy present on the scene suffers the chosen status effect,
then every enemy present on the scene whose current Insight die size is equal to or
lower than yours loses an amount of Hit Points and Mind Points equal to【 your Skill
Level in Resourceful, multiplied by 5】. These amounts increase by 5 if you are level
20 or higher, or by 10 if you are level 40 or higher.
Additionally, your attacks with bows deal extra damage equal to【 1 + your Skill Level
in Resourceful】 as long as you have no martial armor equipped.
REAPER STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the High Speed Skill (see Rogue) and/or the
Stolen Time Skill (see Entropist).
You gain a +5 bonus to your Accuracy Checks and Magic Checks for attacks and
offensive spells (r) that include one or more enemies in Crisis among the targets.
After you reduce one or more enemies to 0 Hit Points, if at least one of them is defeated
this way, you recover from all status effects and may choose one option: perform a free
attack with a weapon you have equipped, and that attack deals 5 extra damage; or
perform the Spell action for free, casting an offensive spell (r) with a total MP cost
equal to or lower than 10 without paying its MP cost. This attack or spell must target
a single enemy; once you use this Skill during a conflict, you may not use it again until
the beginning of your next turn.
SCORPION TAIL STYLE
Requirements: you must have a Dexterity base die size of d10 or higher.
Your attacks with weapons belonging to the flail Category may target flying creatures
and deal 5 extra damage as long as it is not your turn.
After a creature you can see performs a ranged attack, you may spend an amount of
Mind Points equal to【 5 + the total Result of their Accuracy Check】 in order to have
the attack fail automatically against all targets. You can only use this Skill if you have
a weapon belonging to the flail Category equipped, and it has no effect if the Accuracy
Check was a critical success. W
1516
W
W
SKYSPEAR STYLE
Requirements: you must have learned the Soaring Strike spell (see Elementalist).
You unlock the hidden art of aerial spear combat, learning the Skyjump spell.
Skyjump MP: 10 Target: Self Duration: Scene
You become one with the speed and strength of wind. Until this spell ends, your melee
attacks can target creatures that can only be targeted by ranged attacks, and no other
creature present on the scene is able to see you.
At the start of your turn, this spell ends; then, if you have at least one action available
on this turn and you are able to perform the Spell action, you must use your first
available action to perform the Spell action and cast the Soaring Strike spell, ignoring
its MP cost. If you do and the weapon used belongs to the spear Category, the free
attack granted by the Soaring Strike spell gains multi (2) and deals another 10 extra
damage.
You may only cast this spell if you have a spear equipped, and only if you have also
learned the Soaring Strike spell.
THAUMATURGE STYLE
Requirements: you must have acquired the Healing Power Skill, and must have
learned the Cleanse and/or Heal spells (see Spiritist).
As long as you have one or more brawling weapons equipped, you may treat them
as also belonging to the arcane Category for the purpose of Skills and effects that
require it.
You may use an action to perform a free attack with an arcane weapon you have
equipped; this attack must target a single enemy. If the attack is successful, treat
your High Roll (HR) as 0 when determining damage dealt by it; after the attack has
been resolved, if it was successful, you may perform the Spell action for free, casting
the Cleanse spell or the Heal spell on a single target of your choice (you must have
learned the spell and must pay its MP cost).VORTEX WARRIOR STYLE
Requirements: you must have a Dexterity base die size of d10 or higher, and/or a
Might base die size of d10 or higher.
When you perform the Attack action with a melee weapon that belongs to the heavy or
sword Category, if you have no other weapon equipped, you may perform two separate
attacks instead of one. If you do, both attacks follow the rules for two-weapon fighting:
each attack loses the multi property and cannot gain it, and you treat the High Roll
of each Accuracy Check as being equal to 0 when determining damage. Additionally,
both attacks performed this way must target the same creature; if the first attack is
successful, the second attack's Accuracy Check will trigger a critical success if both dice
show the same number (and the Check is not a fumble).
Note that this Heroic Skill does not stack with a custom weapon's quick customization
(you will still only perform two attacks).
W
1718
W
ARCANIST
(variant draft)
W
ALSO: Avatar, Chosen, Summoner
ARCANIST FREE BENEFITS
w Permanently increase your maximum Hit Points or Mind Points by 5 (your choice).
ARCANIST SKILLS
ARCANE REGENERATION (ç6)
After you willingly dismiss an Arcanum you are merged with, if you are in Crisis, you
may have yourself and every ally present on the scene recove【r SL × 5】 Hit Points.
BIND AND SUMMON
You may bind Arcana to your soul and summon them later. When you encounter a new
Arcanum, the Game Master will reveal what you must do in order to bind them.
You may use an action and spend 30 Mind Points to summon the power of one of the
Arcana you have previously bound (see next page).
If you take this Skill at character creation, you begin play with one Arcanum bound
to you (you may choose it from the sample Arcana or create it with your group). Any
further Arcana must be obtained through exploration and story progression.
PHANTOM STRENGTH (ç6)
When you perform a pulse, before resolving its effects, you may choose to have all
damage you deal ignore Affinities until the end of this turn. If you do, the next time you
deal damage before the end of this turn, you dea【l SL + 4】 extra damage.
QUICK SUMMONING (ç2)
When you summon an Arcanum on your turn during a conflict, choose up to two options:
reduce its MP cost by【 SL × 5】; and/or after you summon the Arcanum, if you are
merged with it, immediately perform its pulse. If you choose at least one option, you
cannot willingly dismiss that Arcanum until the start of your next turn; if you choose
both options, that Arcanum's dismiss effect will not be available for this summoning.
RITUAL ARCANISM
You may perform Rituals of the Arcanism discipline, as long as their effects fall within
the domains of one or more Arcana you have bound (see next pages).
Arcanism Rituals use【 WLP + WLP】 for the Magic Check.This is an attempt at an alternate version of the Arcanist Class after 2+ years of extensive
feedback about how it felt in play. It is not the official version of the Class.
MERGING WITH AN ARCANUM
When you summon an Arcanum, you gain their merge benefits; those benefits last
until the Arcanum is dismissed (see below).
You cannot summon an Arcanum while already merged with one; you must first
dismiss the current Arcanum.
DISMISSING AN ARCANUM
If you are merged with an Arcanum, they will be automatically dismissed at the end
of the scene, if you die or fall unconscious, or if you leave the scene.
You may also willingly dismiss the Arcanum you are currently merged with: this never
requires an action, but during a conflict it can only be done on your turn, and never
while another effect is being resolved.
PULSE AND DISMISS EFFECTS
In addition to their merge effects, most Arcana also grant the Arcanist a pulse effect
and a dismiss effect.
w As long as you are merged with a given Arcanum, you may use an action to unleash
that Arcanum's pulse effect. You may only do so during a conflict scene, and only once
per turn.
w When you willingly dismiss an Arcanum, you may use their dismiss effect - if the
Arcanum is dismissed for any other reason, this effect cannot be used. You are also
free to ignore a dismiss effect if you don't want to use it.
w If a pulse or dismiss effect deals damage, it will deal 5 extra damage if you are level
20 or higher, or 10 extra damage if you are level 40 or higher.
Some effects follow unique rules, explained within the Arcanum's text.
DOMAINS
Each Arcanum is associated with a few key concepts or domains. The Game Master
should use these to establish the trials or conditions needed for the Arcanum to lend
their power, and to adjudicate Rituals performed through the Ritual Arcanism Skill
once that Arcanum has been bound.
W
1920
W
NEW SAMPLE ARCANA
W
ANTIKYTHERA
The enigmatic custodian of time and space.
Domains: space, time, void.
MERGE KALEIDOSCOPE VEIL
After you lose Hit Points due to damage, if that damage has a type and that type is not
physical, you gain Resistance to that damage type and lose any previous Resistance
granted by this effect.
When this Arcanum is dismissed, you lose any Resistance gained through this effect.
PULSE BINARY STARS
You deal 10 fire damage to a creature you can see; then, you deal 10 ice damage to a
creature you can see (the same or a different one).
DISMISS SPACETIME SUBTRACTION
Choose one option: every enemy present on the scene suffers slow; or every enemy
present on the scene who is suffering from slow will perform one fewer action during
their next turn (to a minimum of 0 actions); or you teleport yourself and up to five
other nearby allies you can see to a location you visited in the past, provided that
location is within 1 travel day of your position.
Once the second or third option is chosen, this dismiss effect will not be available
until the next dawn.
ARCANA, OLD AND NEW
A big part of Arcanist's charm is creating new Arcana for use in your campaign,
and this variant aims to make any conversions from the official formula as
painless as possible. Most of the time, it will be enough to reduce any damage
or healing granted by dismiss effect by 10, and to add a pulse effect with power
close to those you see in these examples – if the original Arcanum granted the
ability to perform a given action or effect once per turn, make that its pulse.
Some of the original Arcana also didn't have a dismiss effect, and they must
be reworked to include it so that there is still a downside when using Quick
Summoning (for a useful example of this process, see how Arcanum of the
Sword was converted into Nimue).BANSHEE
The ominous tyrant lord of winds.
Domains: birds, storms, winds.
MERGE IMPENDING CATASTROPHE
You have Resistance to air damage, and when you deal air or physical damage, you
deal extra damage equal to your current Whirlwind Points.
When this Arcanum is dismissed, you lose all Whirlwind Points.
PULSE ZEPHYR BLADES
You deal 10 air damage to each of up to two creatures you can see. Then, you gain
1 Whirlwind Point, or 2 Whirlwind Points if you dealt damage to only one creature.
DISMISS HURRICANE SCREECH
You deal an amount of air damage equal to【 the amount of Whirlwind Points you
lost by dismissing this Arcanum, multiplied by 5】 to every enemy present on the
scene. This damage ignores Resistances.
CALADRIUS
The winged master of healing magic.
Domains: exorcism, healing, sunlight.
MERGE PROTECTIVE GAZE
When you summon this Arcanum, choose a status effect: dazed, enraged, poisoned,
shaken, slow, or weak. As long as you are merged with this Arcanum, you and every
ally present on the scene are immune to the chosen status effect.
PULSE CLEANSING SUNLIGHT
Choose one option: you deal 10 light damage to each of up to two creatures you can
see; or one creature you can see recovers from all status effects.
DISMISS HEALING FEATHERS
You and every ally present on the scene recover 30 Hit Points. This amount increases
to 40 if you are level 20 or higher, or to 50 if you are level 40 or higher.
W
2122
W
W
DAHAKA
The slithering prince of desert sands.
Domains: earth, poison, sandstorms.
MERGE HARDENED SCALES
You have Resistance to earth damage and are immune to poisoned.
Your melee attacks can target flying creatures.
PULSE NUMBING BITE
You deal 10 poison damage to each of up to two creatures you can see. Then, each
creature who lost Hit Points due to this damage suffers slow.
DISMISS TECTONIC CRUSH
You deal 20 earth damage to every enemy present on the scene who isn't flying,
floating, falling, or otherwise in mid-air. This damage ignores Resistances, and also
ignores Immunities and Absorptions of creatures afflicted by slow.
KUZUNOHA
The fierce protector of witches and beasts.
Domains: animals, lightning, sorcery.
MERGE MANTLE OF THE WHITE FOX
You have Resistance to bolt damage, and all bolt damage dealt by you and by every
ally present on the scene ignores Resistances.
You can communicate with creatures of the beast, monster, and plant Species.
PULSE CRACKLING SIGIL
Choose one option: you perform a free attack with a weapon you have equipped;
or you perform the Spell action for free, casting an offensive (r) spell with a total
Mind Point cost of 20 or lower. If this attack or spell deals damage, you may change
its type to bolt.
DISMISS ROARING THUNDERBOLTS
You deal 20 bolt damage to every enemy present on the scene. This damage ignores
Resistances; each creature who lost Hit Points due to this damage suffers dazed.LILITH
She who wages war against Celestial Spheres.
Domains: chaos, rebellion, revelation.
MERGE WINGS OF EDEN
You have Resistance to dark and light damage.
You may never have more than 10 Gnosis Points, and you lose all Gnosis Points when
this Arcanum is dismissed.
PULSE CLAWS OF THE FALLEN
You perform a free attack with a weapon you have equipped; if it is a melee attack,
it can target flying creatures. This attack deals extra damage equal to your current
Gnosis Points, and an additional 5 extra damage against creatures who Absorb light
damage or are Immune to it. After this attack is resolved, you gain 1 Gnosis Point for
every creature who lost Hit Points due to its damage.
DISMISS PARADISE LOST
Every enemy present on the scene loses an amount of Hit Points equal to【 the
amount of Gnosis Points you lost by dismissing this Arcanum, multiplied by 5】.
This Hit Point loss increases by 10 against Villains; additionally, it increases by 10 if
you are level 20 or higher, or by 20 if you are level 40 or higher.
W
2324
W
W
LORELEI
The serene and inscrutable fey ruler of the glaciers.
Domains: cold, ice, silence.
MERGE SUBZERO SILENCE
You have Resistance to ice damage and are immune to enraged.
When you deal damage, you may change its type to ice.
PULSE WINTER MELODY
You deal 10 ice damage to each of up to two creatures you can see. Then, each creature
who lost Hit Points due to this damage suffers weak.
DISMISS GLACIER'S DISDAIN
You deal 20 ice damage to every enemy present on the scene. This damage ignores
Resistances; each creature who lost Hit Points due to this damage also loses an equal
amount of Mind Points.
NIMUE
The wielder of ninety-nine swords.
Domains: conquest, heroism, leadership.
MERGE ROYAL ARMAMENTS
When you deal damage, you deal 5 extra damage; all damage you deal loses its type
and cannot gain a type (thus being unaffected by damage Affinities).
PULSE ARONDIGHT
You perform a free attack with a weapon you have equipped. This attack targets Magic
Defense instead of Defense.
DISMISS GORDIAN SLICE
One creature you can see loses 30 Hit Points, or 40 Hit Points if you are level 30 or
higher. Then, if that creature is not a Villain and their current Hit Points are equal to
or lower than your Crisis score, you reduce that creature to 0 Hit Points.QILIN
The elusive herald of wisdom and good fortune.
Domains: knowledge, prosperity, temperance.
MERGE ENLIGHTENED SERENITY
You treat your Insight as if it were one die size higher (up to a maximum of d12).
PULSE STEPS OF PROSPERITY
Choose one option: one ally you can see treats their Insight as if it were one die size
higher (up to a maximum of d12) until the start of your next turn; or you perform the
Spell action for free, casting a non-offensive (r) spell with a total Mind Point cost
of 10 or lower without paying its MP cost.
DISMISS ORACLE
You ask the Game Master a single question. The Game Master must answer truthfully,
describing the vision shown to you by this Arcanum.
Once used, this dismiss effect will not be available until the next dawn.
SERAPH
The guardian of one hundred gates.
Domains: judgment, protection, sacrifice.
MERGE GENTLE BASTION
When you summon this Arcanum, choose a damage type: air, bolt, dark, earth, fire, ice,
or poison. As long as you are merged with this Arcanum, your allies present on the
scene have Resistance to the chosen type (you do not gain this Resistance).
PULSE EXORCISM BOLT
Choose one option: you deal 20 light damage to a creature you can see; or one
creature you can see that is affected by one or more spells with a duration of "Scene"
is no longer affected by any of those spells instead.
DISMISS TWILIGHT OF JUDGMENT
You deal 20 light damage to every enemy present on the scene. This damage ignores
Resistances and Immunities.
W
2526
W
W
TUBALCAIN
The blazing guardian of the forge.
Domains: fire, heat, metal.
MERGE BLESSINGS OF THE ANVIL
You have Resistance to fire damage, and fire damage you deal ignores Resistances.
When you deal damage, you may change its type to fire.
PULSE FORGE HAMMER
Choose one weapon you have equipped; you may change that weapon's Category (see
Core Rulebook, page 129) to another Category of your choice until the end of your
next turn. Then, perform a free attack with that weapon: this attack gains multi (2).
DISMISS MOLTEN WAVE
Choose one option: you deal 20 fire damage to every enemy present on the scene,
and this damage ignores Resistances; or, until the start of your next turn all damage
dealt by you and your allies present on the scene becomes fire and its type cannot
be changed.
VANAGANDR
The dark wolf of the End Times.
Domains: death, despair, hunger.
MERGE SHROUD OF HUNGER
You have Resistance to dark damage, and all damage you deal ignores Resistances.
PULSE DEVOURER OF MEN
You deal 10 dark damage to each of up to two creatures you can see. This effect deals
5 extra damage against humanoids.
DISMISS DEVOURER OF GODS
You deal 30 dark damage to a creature you can see; this damage ignores Resistances
and Immunities. Then, if that creature is in Crisis and lost Hit Points due to this
damage, you recover an amount of Hit Points equal to half the HP loss they suffered.HEROIC SKILLS
The various Heroic Skills available to Arcanists need minor to no changes.
w Arcane Echoes (Core Rulebook) can be kept identical.
w Auramancer's Refraction (Natural Fantasy) can be kept identical.
w Grand Summoning (High Fantasy Atlas) can be kept largely identical, but the
summoned Arcanum also obtains the pulse benefits in your stead, and can use the
Skill action to perform said pulse. However, Grand Summoning can only be used
when an Arcanum is summoned without Quick Summoning.
w Revelation (Core Rulebook) changes to the version below:
REVELATION
Requirements: you must have mastered the Arcanist Class.
You make contact with a previously unknown Arcanum, which you design together
with the rest of your group, and bind that Arcanum to your soul (feel free to make it a
bit stronger than normal, since it was obtained through a Heroic Skill). For as long as
you live, no one else in your world will be able to bind that Arcanum.
When you summon an Arcanum, if you are in Crisis and choose both options of the
Quick Summoning Skill, you only suffer the first penalty (the dismiss effect of the
summoned Arcanum will be available for this summoning).
W
2728
W
CORE BOOK VARIANTS
W
The following pages contain a list of possible variants I have been considering for
the rules, Classes, and Skills found in the Core Rulebook. Once again, these are
not the official versions of these mechanics; rather, this is a collection of ideas,
experimentations and alternatives resulting from years of feedback.
In short, providing feedback on these options and reworks will help me as well as
Need Games evaluate future errata and publications. Remember, these are not errata:
the official errata documents for Fabula Ultima are found at https://drive.google.
com/drive/u/1/folders/1-W0CYBCkyXjHTM_bI16qHuvX89YwkZZK !
INITIATIVE
Page 61. Initiative was never truly useful; a leftover from a previous initiative system
that failed to evolve into something truly interesting, and a "futile" roll of dice.
Conflict scenes now follow a simple rule for determining which side goes first: if the
conflict features no Villains, the heroes' side wins initiative. If the conflict features
one or more Villains, the enemy side wins initiative.
This change has consequences throughout the system.
w Rules and effects that affect initiative no longer exist.
w Armor no longer gives initiative penalties; this makes the travel garb and combat
tunic identical, so the combat tunic's stats should be changed to +2 Defense and
no bonus to Magic Defense. Its cost can remain at 150 zenit.
w NPCs no longer have Initiative, so elite and champion foes do not increase it.
TONIC
Page 104. Tonics are extremely not worth it in their official version.
The effect of the tonic becomes: One creature recovers from all status effects.
DARKBLADE FREE BENEFITS
Page 185. More access to martial ranged weapons is good, and Shadow Strike never
required melee weapons specifically.
The second free benefit becomes "Gain the ability to equip martial armor, and choose
one: gain the ability to equip martial melee weapons; or gain the ability to equip
martial ranged weapons."version 1.11
AGONY (ç5)
Darkblade Skill, page 185. The amount of HP and MP regain granted to dual or triple
weapon users spiraled out of control far too quickly. Limiting it to once per turn, and
only to enemies, makes it a lot more reasonable and in line with the original design
expectations, removing the lure of "cheesy" strategies that harm allies.
The Skill's initial text becomes: "Once per turn (including other creatures' turns), after
you deal damage to one or more enemies, if you have..."
SPELLBLADE (ç3)
Elementalist Skill, page 187. A few boosts and more flexibility in terms of weapon
Categories, without changing the core (single target magic through weapon stats).
When you cast an offensive (r) spell that targets a single creature and has a total
Mind Point cost of【 SL × 20】 or lower, you may choose one non-arcane weapon
among those you have equipped. If you do, your Magic Check for the spell uses the
chosen weapon's Accuracy Check formula; if that formula includes Dexterity, the Magic
Check also gains a bonus equal to【 SL】. For instance, casting an Elementalist spell
through a bronze sword when you have Skill Level 2 in Spellblade will cause the
Magic Check to be【 DEX + MIG】 +3 instead o【f INS + WLP】.
SOARING STRIKE
Elementalist Spell, page 188. Swords should have been included.
The extra damage granted by the spell now also applies to swords.
VORTEX > RIFT AND VORTEX
Elementalist Spell, page 189. Old Vortex was terribly situational.
Vortex becomes an air-based equivalent of the Flare/Iceberg/Thunderbolt spells.
Add Rift, which follows the same rules but deals earth damage.
W
2930
W
W
STOLEN TIME (ç4)
Entropist Skill, page 191. The Skill is now cheaper and less action-intensive, and
requires less investment. It is also more in line with the "time thief" design intent.
During a conflict, you may use an action to interfere with the flow of time by spending
up to【 SL × 5】 Mind Points. For every 5 Mind Points you spend this way, choose one
option: one creature you can see suffers slow; or one creature you can see recovers
from slow; or one enemy you can see who is suffering from slow loses【 10 + (SL × 5)
】 Hit Points; or one creature you can see may perform the Equipment action for free;
or choose one ally you can see who has yet to take a turn during this round: that ally
may take their turn immediately after yours during this round.
Each option can only be chosen once per use of this Skill.
ACCELERATION
Entropist Spell, page 192. The original version was too good, good enough to be a
non-choice and put a lot of pressure on anyone who picked this Class.
Acceleration 20 One creature Scene
At the end of each of their turns, the target may choose one option: perform a free
attack with a weapon they have equipped; or perform the Spell action for free, casting
a spell with a total MP cost equal to or lower than 10 (paying its MP cost). After the
same creature benefits from this effect a second time, this spell ends.
DARK WEAPON
Entropist Spell, page 192. This shouldn't have the same cost as Elemental Weapon.
The cost of this spell is now 5 MP.
DRAIN SPIRIT
Entropist Spell, page 192. The spell was not impactful enough.
The amount of Mind Points lost by the target is now【 HR + 20】, no【t HR + 15】.
OMEGA
Entropist Spell, page 193. This spell wasn't good enough for its cost.
The cost of this spell is now 15 MP.BODYGUARD > RETALIATION (ç5)
Guardian Skill, page 197. Bodyguard was passive and routine-inducing. This new skill
encourages alternating actions, and allows mastery for non-armor/shield users.
When you deal damage during your turn, if you performed the Guard action during
your previous turn and chose to cover an ally, you dea【l SL】 extra damage.
FORTRESS (ç4)
Guardian Skill, page 197. The scaling is now simpler to calculate.
The HP increase becomes【 SL × 5】, and this Skill's maximum Skill Level is now 4.
FOCUSED (ç6)
Loremaster Skill, page 199. The scaling is now simpler to calculate.
The MP increase becomes【 SL × 5】, the bonus to【 INS + INS】 Open Checks remains
equal to【 SL】, and this Skill's maximum Skill Level is now 6.
CONDEMN (ç6)
Orator Skill, page 201. Improved to make it more palatable, it now grants damage
against the target. Max SL now 6.
You may use an action and spend 5 Mind Points to perform an Opposed【 INS + WLP】
Check against an enemy who can hear and understand you. If you succeed, that enemy
loses【 SL × 5】 Mind Points, suffers a status effect of your choice among dazed and
shaken, and all sources dea【l SL】 extra damage to them until the start of your next turn.
You gain a bonus equal to【 SL】 to you【r INS + WLP】 Checks for this Skill.
ENCOURAGE (ç6)
Orator Skill, page 201. A general boost was needed.
You may use an action and spend 5 Mind Points to choose an ally who can hear and
understand you. That ally recovers【 10 + (SL × 5)】 Hit Points and chooses Dexterity,
Insight, Might, or Willpower: until the start of your next turn, they treat the chosen
Attribute as being one die size higher (up to a maximum of d12).
W
3132
W
W
SOUL STEAL (ç5)
Rogue Skill, page 203. Minor tweak to avoid confusion.
The Skill now says "During a conflict, you may use an action..." at the start.
CROSSFIRE
Sharpshooter Skill, page 207. The MP cost was too manageable and spammable.
The MP cost for this Skill is now【 5 + the Result of their Accuracy Check】.
HAWKEYE (ç5)
Sharpshooter Skill, page 207. The extra damage from the first option was too low
compared to the action cost, and just like with Breach, I tried to provide an option for
greatly increased damage at the cost of forgoing elemental Vulnerabilities.
When you perform the Guard action and choose not to cover another creature, you
may spend 10 Mind Points to choose one option: the next ranged attack you perform
before the end of your next turn deals【 5 + (SL × 5)】 extra damage, and all its damage
ignores Resistances and Vulnerabilities; or you perform a free attack with a bow or
firearm weapon you have equipped, treating your High Roll as being equal to 0 when
determining damage.
HEALING POWER (ç2)
Spiritist Skill, page 207. The recovery was too weak in early game.
The recovery granted by the Skill becomes equal to【 3 + (SL, multiplied by the
number of Bonds you have)】.
AURA AND BARRIER
Spiritist Spells, page 208. The old values did not scale well with enemy bonuses.
Both spells have the following text added: "This score increases to 13 if you are level
20 or higher, or to 14 if you are level 40 or higher."SOUL SHROUD
New Spiritist spell, page 209.
Soul Shroud 5 × T Up to three creatures Scene
Choose a damage type: dark, light, or poison. Until this spell ends, each target gains
Resistance to the chosen damage type.
SOUL WEAPON
Spiritist Spell, page 209. This shouldn't have the same cost as Elemental Weapon.
The cost of this spell is now 5 MP.
EFFECTS (ALCHEMY)
Tinkerer gadgets, page 213. The first effect should have scaled with level.
The first effect should say "As effect 3, but with poison damage."
W
3334
W
W
TINKERER MAGITECH, OPTION A
Page 215. The Magitech branch of Tinkerer gadgets always presented some issues.
This option rebalances the three benefits, without changing too much.
d
MAGITECH OVERRIDE (Basic)
During a conflict, you may use an action and spend 10 Mind Points to choose a construct
or elemental enemy you can see that does not possess independent intelligence and
is suffering from one or more status effects. If you do, that enemy recovers from all
status effects, then the Game Master reveals its entire profile and you may force it
to immediately perform an action of your choice; during that action, the creature is
treated as an ally of your group.
d
MAGICANNON (Advanced)
You may perform the Inventory action and spend 2 Inventory Points to create a
magicannon (see below) and destroy any magicannon you previously created. If you do
so and both your hand slots are empty, you may immediately equip the newly created
magicannon and perform a free attack with it. Whenever you create a magicannon,
choose what type of damage it deals (air, bolt, earth, fire, ice, or physical).
WEAPON ACCURACY DAMAGE
Magicannon 【DEX + INS】 +1 【HR + 10】
Firearm w Two-handed w Ranged w Cannot have Qualities.
d
MAGISPHERES (Superior)
You develop a magisphere for each of three spells from among those found in the
Elementalist, Entropist, and Spiritist lists; these spells may come from the same list
or from different lists (this does not count as "learning" or "knowing" these spells).
You develop a new magisphere upon reaching level 20, and another upon reaching
level 40 (the same applies if you already reached those levels).
You may perform the Inventory action and spend 2 Inventory Points to perform the
Spell action for free, casting one of the spells you have developed a magisphere for.
The spell follows the normal rules (including MP costs and Magic Checks).TINKERER MAGITECH, OPTION B
Page 215. This alternative directly removes Magitech Override (too situational), and
splits Magicannon and Magispheres into their own separate branches.
If you are playing with the Techno Fantasy Heroic Skill Quantum Magicannon, it
becomes Quantum Armament and requires magitech armament advanced benefits.
MAGISPHERES
d
BASIC MAGISPHERES
Choose two different spells with a target of "Up to three creatures" from among those
found in the Elementalist, Entropist, and Spiritist lists; these two spells may come
from the same list or from different lists (for instance, you could select Lux from
Spiritist and Elemental Shroud from Elementalist). You develop a magisphere for
each of these spells (this does not count as "learning" or "knowing" these spells).
You may perform the Inventory action and spend 2 Inventory Points to perform the
Spell action for free, casting one of the spells you have developed a magisphere for.
The spell follows the normal rules (including MP costs and Magic Checks), and the
Magic Check for spells cast through magispheres is【 INS + WLP】.
d
ADVANCED MAGISPHERES
Choose two different spells from the list of NPC spells (see page 310); you may
not choose the Devastation spell. You develop a magisphere for each spell chosen
this way (this does not count as "learning" or "knowing" these spells), and must
customize the chosen spells as required (for instance, if you select Cursed Breath for a
magisphere, you could choose ice and slow and rename it freezing grenade).
d
SUPERIOR MAGISPHERES
Choose two different spells from among those found in the Elementalist, Entropist,
and Spiritist lists, and/or the list of NPC spells; these two spells may come from the
same list or from different lists (for instance, you could select Acceleration from
Entropist and Area Status from the list of NPC spells). You may not choose the
Devastation spell. You develop a magisphere for each spell chosen this way (this
does not count as "learning" or "knowing" these spells), and must customize any NPC
spells chosen this way as required.
W
3536
W
W
MAGITECH ARMAMENT
d
BASIC ARMAMENT
You may perform the Inventory action and spend 2 Inventory Points to create a
magitech armament (see below) and destroy any magitech armament you previously
created. Whenever you create a magitech armament, choose a Category for it, choose
whether it is a melee or ranged weapon, and choose an Accuracy formula between
【DEX + INS】 +1 and【 INS + MIG】 +1 for it. Magitech armaments are always two-
handed weapons and cannot benefit from the Monkey Grip Heroic Skill (see Core
Rulebook; in short, the armament will always occupy both hand slots).
WEAPON ACCURACY DAMAGE
Magitech Armament see above 【HR + 12】 physical
One Category of your choice among arcane, brawling, firearm, heavy, spear,
or sword w Two-handed w Melee or Ranged w Cannot have Qualities (but see
Superior Armament, below).
d
ADVANCED ARMAMENT
When you create a magitech armament using the Basic Armament benefit above, if
both your hand slots are empty, you may immediately equip that magitech armament
and perform a free attack with it.
Additionally, whenever you create a magitech armament, you may have it deal air,
bolt, earth, fire, or ice damage instead of physical.
d
SUPERIOR ARMAMENT
If you have your magitech armament equipped, you may use an action to choose one
weapon in your backpack. If you do, that weapon is destroyed and all your magitech
armaments gain its Quality (if any) until you use this effect again (this includes any
future magitech armaments you create as well).
Additionally, as long as you have your magitech armament equipped, you gain a
bonus to Defense and Magic Defense equal to【 half your Skill Level in Gadgets】.BREACH (ç4)
Weaponmaster Skill, page 219. This change is tied to the choice of removing NPCs'
ability to equip items (see next pages), and also the general wish for "non-elemental"
fighter builds to be a thing.
You may use an action and spend 10 Mind Points to perform a free attack with a
melee weapon you have equipped; this attack must target only one creature. If the
attack is successful, choose one option: the attack deals no damage and, until the
start of your next turn, your allies deal【 SL + 4】 extra damage to its target; or the
attack deals【 SL × 5】 extra damage and all its damage ignores Resistances, but it
also ignores Vulnerabilities unless the type of damage dealt is physical.
If you are playing with the High Fantasy Heroic Skill Pulverizing Strike, its effect
changes to "When you use the Breach Skill, if you attack with a melee weapon
belonging to the heavy Category, you may treat your Skill Level in the Breach Skill as
being 2 points higher (to a maximum of 6)."
ADVERSITY
Page 234. This Heroic Skill was too strong.
As long as you are suffering from one or more status effects, you gain a +1 bonus on
all Checks you perform for every status effect you are suffering from (up to a maximum
of +3), and you also deal 2 extra damage for every status effect you are suffering from
(be it with attacks, spells, Arcana, items, or any other method; up to a maximum of 6
extra damage).
AMBIDEXTROUS
Page 234. This Heroic Skill was in serious need of some love.
You may apply the benefits of two-weapon fighting (page 69) to weapons belonging
to different Categories, even if one is a melee weapon and the other is a ranged
weapon (such as a dagger and a firearm, for instance).
As long as you have exactly two weapons equipped and they share no Categories
with each other, you gain a +2 bonus to Defense and the second attack you perform
during each of your turns deals 5 extra damage.
W
3738
W
W
COMET
Heroic Skill, page 235. I am moving towards global effects that do not allow the user
to not damage/cause effects on selected targets.
The spell's text becomes:
Comet 50 Special Istantaneous
Choose one option: you deal 60 damage to one enemy you can see; or you deal 40
damage to every enemy you can see. This damage increases by 5 if you are level 20 or
higher, or by 10 if you are level 40 or higher.
Damage dealt by this spell has no type (thus ignoring damage Affinities).
MATHEMAGIC
Heroic Skill, page 237. The original was very confusing in how it worked.
When you cast a spell with a target of "One creature", you may choose an Attribute
(Dexterity, Insight, Might, or Willpower) and a die size (d6, d8, d10, or d12). If you
do, the spell's target becomes "Every creature present on the scene whose current die
size in that Attribute matches your choice" and its total Mind Point cost is doubled.
Additionally, all mentions of "the target" in the spell's text are replaced with "each
target"; or they are replaced with "one or more targets" if the spell is Anomaly, Dispel,
Mercy, or Mirror. When the spell ends on one or more of its targets, it automatically
ends on all its targets.
If you cast an offensive (r) spell this way, you perform a single Magic Check and
confront it with the Magic Defense of each target.
Note: this version of Mathemagic assumes you are using reworked Acceleration.
MONKEY GRIP
Heroic Skill, page 238. Official version is a "strictly worse" Powerful Strike 99% of the
time, aside for super specific cases.
You may now equip two-handed weapons belonging to the flail, heavy, spear, and
sword Categories within a single hand slot.
Additionally, the first attack you perform with a two-handed weapon during each turn
deals 5 extra damage, and its damage ignores Resistances.RAMPART
Heroic Skill, page 239. This heroic skill needed a boost to match Unbreakable.
Once per conflict scene, at the beginning of a round, if you have a martial armor or a
shield equipped, you may spend 20 Mind Points. If you do, you and every ally present
on the scene have Resistance to all damage types and cannot suffer status effects until
the end of the round (this does not let you recover from preexisting status effects).
STATUS IMMUNITY > FAST LEARNER
Heroic Skill, page 240. The original Status Immunity was boring and underwhelming,
and Wayfarer deserves better. Fast Learner is an homage to the classic "Mime" .
Once per conflict scene when another Player Character you can see performs the Skill
or Spell action to cast a spell or activate a Skill or Heroic Skill, if you have not learned
or acquired that spell or Skill, you can temporarily learn or acquire that spell or Skill
until the end of the scene.
If you acquire a Skill this way, you are treated as having 1 Skill Level in it, and you
do not gain any of the additional benefits you would normally acquire when gaining
that Skill through character progression: for instance, you would not create a new
companion by temporarily acquiring the Faithful Companion Skill (see page 217), nor
would you learn any volumes, keys, or tones by temporarily acquiring the Magichant
Skill (see High Fantasy Atlas, page 137).
TEMPEST STRIKE
Heroic Skill, pag. 240. Made more flexible and reliable.
When you perform a melee attack with the multi property, you gain a bonus to your
Accuracy Check equal to the value of that multi property, and the attack deals 5 extra
damage. If the attack targets only one creature, it deals another 5 extra damage.
W
3940
W
W
UPGRADE
Heroic Skill, page 241. The restrictions and costs on this Skill were unjustified.
When you rest, you may choose any number of armors, shields, and/or weapons among
those owned by your group. For each item chosen this way, you may either add a
Quality to it (if it doesn't have one) or replace its current Quality with a different one.
These new Qualities must come from the list of default Qualities available for items of
that type, and must have an associated cost modifier of +1000 zenit or lower. At the
end of the rest, you must pay an amount of zenit equal to the total sum of those cost
modifiers, reduced by【 your Skill Level in Visionary, multiplied by 100】. If you do, the
items will be modified according to your choices.
The default list of weapon abilities can be found on page 269, while the default list of
armor and shield abilities can be found on page 280.
VOLCANO > ULTIMAGIC
Heroic Skill, page 241. Many Players felt the mandatory fire element constraining.
The Volcano Heroic Skill is now named Ultimagic, and allows the choice of a damage
type among air, bolt, earth, fire, and ice when acquired. The spell's text becomes:
Ultimagic 40 Special Istantaneous
Choose one option: you deal 50 damage of the type you have chosen to one enemy
you can see; or you deal 30 damage of the type you have chosen to every enemy you
can see. This damage increases by 5 if you are level 20 or higher, or by 10 if you are
level 40 or higher.
Damage dealt by this spell ignores Immunities and Resistances.
RARE WEAPON ACCURACY
Designing rare weapons, page 268. The inability for weapons that start with a +1 to
improve the inherent bonus to Accuracy devalues them compared to the rest.
The third bullet point in step 3 should say: "You may add a +1 bonus to the weapon's
Accuracy Check, or improve its existing bonus by 1 point. If you do, increase its cost by
100 zenit; this cannot bring the weapon's bonus above +2."RARE WEAPON ADDITIONAL DAMAGE
Designing rare weapons, page 268. The 4 damage increase for 200 zenit was too
abrupt and, while simple, it became accessible way too early.
The fourth bullet point in step 3 is removed.
Add a step 5, which says: "Finally, the weapon's damage modifier is increased by 2 for
every 1000 zenit of its cost (for instance, a rare weapon worth 1500 zenit and based
on a steel dagger deals【 HR + 6】 damage)."
Additionally, the rule that automatically made any weapon with a damage modifier of
+10 or higher into a martial weapon is removed.
To convert existing rare weapons, simply reduce the cost of any weapon whose
damage is higher than their base version by 200, then reduce their damage formula
by 4, and finally increase their damage formula by [(cost/1000) x 2].
If a weapon is given a new Quality via something like the Upgrade Heroic Skill, make
sure to update the weapon's cost and also its damage bonus.
DESIGNING NPCs
Pages 303 and after. These changes are the result of years of people giving NPCs
extremely overpowered equipment, or designing them mostly with PC Skills that
are not really designed to work on NPCs; additionally, this makes it so a foe cannot
be easily disarmed without some sort of Clock. Obviously, this change must be
accompanied by the rework of the Breach Skill (see previous pages).
w The Use Equipment Skill no longer exists. Humanoids have 4 free initial Skills, just
like Monsters. They may wield equipment, from a narrative standpoint, but
mechanically these are just normal basic attacks, spells, or unique actions.
w NPCs can no longer choose Class Skills, only NPC Skills. Effects such as the Protect
Skill (see Grey Howler, page 325), can be recreated via the "Reaction" NPC Skill,
for instance.
DEVASTATION
NPC Spells, page 310. The effect has been uniformed to Comet and Ultimagic.
The spell's text now says: "You deal 30 (choose type) damage to every enemy you can
see." instead of "Choose any number of creatures you can see: each of them suffers 30
(choose type) damage."
W
4142
W
W
QUICKEN
NPC Spells, page 310. This spell was too pricey.
The cost of this spell is now 10 MP.
STUDYING A NON-PLAYER CHARACTER
Page 319. These changes allow more groups to examine foes with ease without
investing heavily into Insight or Loremaster, and it also make it so the tiers are the
same as standard Open Checks.
Instead of being revealed at 10+, 13+ and 16+, the various degrees of NPC data are
revealed at 7+, 10+, and 13+.d
BATTLE SUPERIORITY
This optional rule was already a bit problematic with the core rules, but as the game
grew, it just suffered more and more. It had to be reworked.
This optional rule adds another layer of strategy to battles and rewards a clever, non-
impulsive use of elemental attacks and Affinities.
If you use this rule, Player Characters (and only Player Characters) gain access to a
special game resource called Superiority Points, which allows them to enter a special
state known as boost.
w When a Player Character deals damage to one or more enemies, if one or more of
those enemies are Vulnerable to the damage dealt and none of them are Immune or
Absorb it, the group gains 1 Superiority Point. A Player Character can only generate
Superiority Points during their turn, and only once per turn.
w When a Player Character deals damage to one or more enemies, if at least one of
those enemies is Immune to or Absorbs that damage, the group loses all Superiority
Points and any boosted characters lose their boost. Additionally, every creature on
the Player Characters' side who is yet to take a turn during the current round loses
the ability to do so; any turn-based effects will not end, begin, or recharge, but if any
of those creatures were Guarding and/or covering someone else, those benefits end.
If this happens during a Player Character's turn, that turn also ends immediately.
At the end of each round, all boosted Player Characters lose their boost; then, if
the group has a number of Superiority Points equal to or higher than the number
of Player Characters currently in the conflict (ignoring PCs who left the scene,
surrendered, or sacrificed themselves), they lose all Superiority Points and each of
those Player Characters becomes boosted.
w On their turn, a boosted character can perform an additional action; if they do so,
they lose their boost.
w Boosted characters lose their boost at the end of the scene.
To make this optional rule shine, the Game Master should combine enemies with
diametrically opposite Affinities, employ a lot of adversaries with Immunities and
Absorptions, and also grant each boss they design the ability to alter their Affinities
at least once over the course of the conflict.
W
4344
W
W
d
PRESSURE AND STAGGER
This is a new optional rule that introduces a sort of break/stagger system.
Under this optional rule, Vulnerabilities do not immediately increase Hit Point loss
against the more powerful foes; instead, they can be exploited to pressure them up to
a breaking point, where they become staggered and Vulnerable to most damage types,
in addition to losing their actions for the rest of the round.
If you use this rule, every elite and champion enemy faced in battle enters the scene
with an empty Pressure Clock and a variable amount of pressure points: weapon
Categories that are especially useful against them (the Categories are arcane, bow,
brawling, dagger, firearm, flail, heavy, spear, sword, thrown).
w An elite has a 4-section Pressure Clock and two pressure points.
w A champion has a Pressure Clock with a number of sections equal to【 2 + twice the
number of soldiers they replace】, and four pressure points.
Rules for Pressure Clocks are described below.
FILLING A PRESSURE CLOCK
An enemy's Pressure Clock can be filled as per the normal rules (Opportunities,
Objective actions and more), or through effects that explicitly mention Pressure
Clocks. Not only that, it can also be filled in the following ways:
w When a non-staggered enemy loses Hit Points due to damage of a type they are
Vulnerable to, that enemy does not lose twice the normal amount of Hit Points as
described on page 92 of the Core Rulebook; instead, their Pressure Clock fills by 1
section, or by 2 sections if the HP loss they suffered is equal to or higher than【 10
+ half that enemy's level】. For instance, the Clock of a level 25 enemy will fill by 2
sections if they lose 22 or more Hit Points from the blow.
w When a non-staggered enemy loses Hit Points due to damage dealt by an attack
with a weapon, if one or more of that weapon's Categories fall within that enemy's
pressure points, their Pressure Clock fills by 1 section.
These two effects are not cumulative; if an attack qualifies for both, only apply the
first effect (thus ignoring pressure points).EMPTYING A PRESSURE CLOCK
An enemy's Pressure Clock can only be emptied at the end of a round in which they've
been staggered (see below), or through effects that explicitly mention Pressure
Clocks. Be careful, however, because these effects can be very frustrating.
STAGGERED ENEMIES
As soon as an enemy's Pressure Clock becomes full, that enemy becomes staggered.
A staggered enemy suffers the following penalties:
w The enemy cannot take turns; any remaining turns they had available during the
current round are simply wasted. If an enemy becomes staggered during their own
turn, that turn ends immediately.
w The enemy treats their neutral (-) and Resistance (RS) Affinities as if they were
Vulnerabilities instead, and all their Vulnerabilities (the preexisting ones as well as
those gained from stagger) function as normal, causing double Hit Point loss.
w Any effects based on the enemy's turns will not end, begin, nor recharge. However, if
this enemy was Guarding and/or covering someone else, their Guard is broken and
all its benefits end immediately; when a flying enemy is staggered, they are forced to
land immediately (and will resume flight at the end of the round).
At the end of each round, each staggered enemy erases all sections of their Pressure
Clocks and stop being staggered; due to this, it can be wise to wait a little bit and
stagger a foe at the beginning of a new round to get the most out of it.
ADDITIONAL ADVICE
If you use this optional rule, consider the following:
w An enemy's pressure points can be revealed much the same way as Affinities:
any game option that reveals a creature's Affinities, such as an Open Check or the
Loremaster's Quick Assessment Skill, can also be used to learn pressure points.
w You can create special rare items whose Qualities improve the user's ability to fill
Pressure Clocks, or grant additional benefits or damage against staggered foes.
W
4546
W
W
d
BATTLE STANCES
This is a new optional rule that introduces a system resembling a front and back line
logic, but without actually referencing the characters' physical position in space, thus
leaving the Players free to describe any sort of action.
This optional rule allows Players to better protect the more fragile members of the
group, and is especially recommended if several characters have low maximum Hit
Point values, if the heroes lack the ability to deny or mitigate enemy damage, or if the
group simply prefers a more relaxed playstyle.
At the start of each conflict scene and at the start of each round, all creatures that
are part of the Player Character's side must decide whether their stance will be
aggressive or defensive (Players make this decision together for any allied NPCs that
may be participating alongside them).
w Aggressive stance. Creatures in this stance follow the normal rules. Additionally,
enemies must always include as many aggressive creatures as possible among the
targets of their attacks and offensive (r) spells; however, if an aggressive creature
has a targeting manipulation effect (such as the Fury's Provoke Skill or the Dancer's
Peacock Dance), these effects have priority over this rule (the enemy will still give
priority to these characters among the available aggressive targets).
w Defensive stance. When a creature in this stance deals or suffers damage, the amount
of damage is halved (before applying Affinities).
Creatures must wait for the beginning of the next round if they want to change their
stance, but they may also be forced to change it:
If at any time during a conflict the number of creatures in defensive stance is higher
than the number of creatures in aggressive stance, all creatures in defensive stance
must immediately switch to aggressive stance.
It can be a good idea to use coins or tokens to keep track of creature stances; and
finally, it can be very interesting to create unique enemy abilities and item Qualities
that interact with stances in new and dynamic ways.
Examples: an ability that turns defensive enemies aggressive, a weapon that deals
damage based on how many allies are aggressive, an attack that ignores aggressive
enemies, a foe whose attacks change depending on enemy stances.d
CATEGORY-BASED AFFINITIES
This is a new optional rule that adds value to collecting weapons of various types.
DO NOT use it together with Pressure and Stagger.
This optional rule incentivizes variety in the weapons used by the heroes, and makes it
so that collecting weapons belonging to many different Categories is just as valuable
as gathering weapons that deal damage of different types.
If you use this optional rule, apply the following changes to enemy creation:
w Every enemy is Vulnerable to damage of all types dealt by weapons belonging to at
least one of up to three different Categories.
w For every Category an enemy is Vulnerable to, choose one option: that enemy has
Resistance to damage of all types dealt by weapons belonging to at least one of two
different Categories they're not Vulnerable or Immune to; or that enemy is Immune to
damage of all types dealt by weapons belonging to a Category they're not Vulnerable
or Resistant to.
Example: a gelatinous, slimy enemy could be Vulnerable to damage dealt by bows,
daggers and spears, Resistant to damage dealt by flails and thrown weapons, and
Immune to damage dealt by brawling and heavy weapons.
These Affinities combine with the standard Affinities following the standard rules
found on page 92 of the Core Rulebook: for instance, if an enemy Vulnerable to bows
and Resistant to fire is hit by a bow that deals fire damage, they will be treated as
having neutral Affinity towards that damage.
While this rule is great for groups that like collecting a great variety of weapons and
switching between them, it can be frustrating for Players who have a specific aesthetic
in mind for their hero (such as a dedicated spear warrior or a gunslinger). Only use it if
everyone is enthusiastic about the idea.
W
47